.\" -*- nroff -*-  (This is for Emacs)
.TH DOSEMU 1 "May, 2001" "Version 1.0.2" "DOS Emulation"
.SH NAME
dosemu, xdosemu \- run DOS and DOS programs under Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dosemu
[
.B \-dumb
]
[
.B \-home
]
[
.B \-install
.I bootdir
]
[
.B args
]
.PP
.B xdosemu
[
.B \-dumb
]
[
.B \-home
]
[
.B \-install
.I bootdir
]
[
.B args
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dosemu
is the wrapper script for
.B dosemu.bin
(1)
which invokes the Linux dos emulator, also known as
.BR DOSEMU .
The wrapper also takes care of (eventually) installing the private instance of
.BR DOSEMU
in the user's $HOME, if this doesn't exist.
.br

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I args
any number of options described in
.BR dosemu.bin
(1), please refer to this man page for further details.
However, take care to quote and escape correctly so bash doesn't
mess up arguments containing blanks and backslashes.
.TP
.I -dumb
use `dumb' terminal mode. This will only work for DOS applications, which do
plain text output to stdout, but has the advantage that (A) the output of
the DOS application stacks up in your xterm scroll buffer and (B) you can
redirect it to a file such as
.TP
		$ ./dosemu -dumb -E dir > listing

Note that DOSEMU command.com's commandline editor/history will also work
here, however, editing is restricted to BACKSPACE'ing.
.TP
.I -home
in addition to drive C:, make the users $HOME available as drive D:.
Note, however, that most of the Unix file names will get mangled.
.TP
.I -install
launched as part of a systemwide installation, this option installs
a private instance of a different DOS than the DOSEMU distributed
dosemu-freedos-bin (maybe any proprietary DOS, which is bootable via fatfs).
.I bootdir
is the base name of a directory, the users has to install himself into
the same directory the instance will be created in. The configuration in
conf/dosemu.ocnf will be changed to boot this directory.

.SH AUTHOR
.B DOSEMU
(comprised of the files
.B dosemu.bin
and 
.B dosemu
) is based on version 0.4 of the original program written by Matthias Lautner
(no current address that I know of).
.PP
Robert Sanders <gt8134b@prism.gatech.edu> was maintaining and enhancing 
the incarnation of 
.B DOSEMU 
with which this man page was originally distributed. During about 4 years
James B. MacLean <macleajb@ednet.ns.ca> was the restless leader of the
dosemu team, implementation of DPMI (which made Windows-3.1, dos4gw, djgpp,
e.t.c running) happened during his 'governement' and brought the project
near to Beta-state.
Now Hans Lermen <lermen@fgan.de> is maintaining this funny software.

.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I $HOME/.dosemu/bindist_path
Contains the path to the current per user
.B DOSEMU
local directory. This will be created silently, if not existing.
.TP
.I $HOME/dosemu/bin/
.TP
.I $HOME/dosemu/conf/
.TP
.I $HOME/dosemu/freedos/
.TP
.I $HOME/dosemu/Xfonts/
default directories of the local per user DOSEMU instance
.TP   
.I /opt/dosemu/bin/
.TP   
.I /opt/dosemu/doc/
.TP   
.I /opt/dosemu/man/
.TP   
.I /opt/dosemu/dosemu-bin.tgz
.TP   
.I /opt/dosemu/dosemu-freedos-bin.tgz
default systemwide installation, containing binaries and templates
(path /opt/dosemu can be changed during creation of the systemwide installation).
.TP   
.I /usr/bin/dosemu
.TP           
.I /usr/bin/xdosemu
symlinks to
.I /opt/dosemu/bin/dosemu
(path /usr/bin can be changed during creation of the systemwide installation).
 


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dosemu.bin "(1)
