.TH "midid" "1" "2008-08-28"

.SH "NAME" 
midid \- Raw Midi interpreter


.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.B midid 
[OPTIONS] [\fIinput_file\fR]

.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP
This manual page documents briefly the \fBmidid\fR command.
.PP
.B midid
reads STDIN or \fIinput_file\fR and interprets it as raw MIDI data according to
the General Midi standard.
.PP
The General Midi data is sent to a sound device (default), a .MID file, or to 
.BR timidity (1)
if you specify it.
.PP
.B midid
includes a standalone mode for 
.BR timidity (1):
\fBmidid\fR will then attempt to start and configure
\fBtimidity\fR(1) itself for you.

.SH "OPTIONS"

.SS Standard options
.TP
.BR \-o \ \fIseconds\fR \-\-timeout=\fIseconds\fR 
Turns output off after \fIseconds\fR  of inactivity. (default: 0\ \-\ no timeout)
.TP
.BR \-r ,  \-\-resident
Stays resident ; doesn't stop at the end of file. It works only if \fIinput_file\fR isn't STDIN.
.TP
.BR \-g ,  \-\-emulate\-gm 
Selects GM mode (default).
.TP
.BR \-m ,  \-\-emulate\-mt 
Selects MT32 mode.
.TP
.BR \-d\ \fIdevice\fR , \-\-device=\fIdevice\fR     
Comma\-separated list of devices to use for output.
.TP
.BR \-l , \-\-list\-devices 
Lists devices.
.TP
.BR \-h
Displays a help message.

.SS Options for .MID file output device
.TP
.BR \-f , \-\-file\ \fIfilename\fR
Sets the .MID output \fIfilename\fR. Default: midid.mid.
.TP
.BR \-t\ \fIbpm\fR , \-\-tempo=\fIbpm\fR    
Sets the tempo (beats/minute). Default: 120.
.TP
.BR \-q\ \fItickrate\fR , \-\-tick-rate= \fItickrate\fR
Sets the number of ticks/quarter note. Default: 144.

.SS Options for timidity(1) client
.TP
.BR \-s\ \fIserver\fR , \-\-server\-name=\fIserver\fR,
Sets the \fBtimidity\fR(1) \fIserver\fR host name. Default: localhost.
.TP
.BR \-p\ \fIport\fR , \-\-port=\fIport\fR
Sets the \fBtimidity\fR(1) server control \fIport\fR.
Default: 0. Specifying 0 enables the standalone mode: \fBmidid\fR will attempt
to start and configure \fBtimidity\fR(1) itself.

.SS Options for using standalone mode with timidity(1)
.TP
.BR \-B\ \fIpath\fR , \-\-timidity\-bin=\fIpath\fR  
Sets the \fBtimidity\fR binary \fIpath\fR.

.TP
.BR \-A\ \fIargs\fR , \-\-timidity\-args=\fIargs\fR 
Specifies some extra arguments to pass to \fBtimidity\fR(1) . Default:
\ \-EFreverb=0\ \-EFchorus=0\ \-EFresamp=1\ \-EFvlpf=0\ \-EFns=0.

.TP
.BR \-M , \-\-timidity\-mono
Tells \fBtimidity\fR(1) to produce mono sound instead of stereo.
.TP
.BR \-L , \-\-timidity\-low
Tells \fBtimidity\fR(1) to produce the low\-q 8bit sound instead of the 16bit.
.TP
.BR \-U , \-\-timidity\-uns            
Tells \fBtimidity\fR(1) to produce the unsigned samples instead of the signed ones.
.TP
.BR \-F\ \fIrate\fR  , \-\-timidity\-freq=\fIrate\fR
Sets the sampling \fIrate\fR for \fBtimidity\fR(1).
.TP
.BR \-C , \-\-timidity\-capture        
Enables the capturing mode: the data produced by \fBtimidity\fR(1) gets captured by
\fBmidid\fR and forwarded to stdout. You won't hear any sound in that mode.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR timidity (1) 

.SH "AUTHORS"
.PP
.B midid 
is:
.\" from source
.PP
Copyright (c) 1997 R.Nijlunsing <rutger@null.net>
.PP
Copyright (c) 2002 Robert Komar <rkomar@telus.net>
.PP
Copyright (c) 2002-2005 Stas Sergeev <stsp@users.sourceforge.net>


This manual page was written by Francois Wendling <frwendling@free.fr> for the
Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
