.\" -*- nroff -*-  (This is for Emacs)
.TH MKFATIMAGE16 1 "September, 1998" "Version ALPHA 0.98" "Make HDIMAGE for DOSEMU"
.SH NAME
mkfatimage16 \- generate a virtual drive image suitable for DOSEMU
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkfatimage16
[
.B \-b bsectfile
]
[{
.B [\-t tracks]
.B [\-h heads]
|
.B \-k Kbytes
}]
[
.B \-l volume-label
]
[
.B \-f outfile
]
[
.B \-p
]
[
.B file...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkfatimage16
creates a hdimage file for
.BR DOSEMU
that is pre-loaded with the files specified on the command line.
The output is either written to
.I stdout
(hence do not forget to append\ "\ >\ hdimagefile", else you will see
garbage on the screen) or to the file specified by the
.B \-f
option. For the latter you may also use option
.B \-p
in order to force padding up to the given size. This padding will result
in so-called holes on an ext2-FS, hence the actual disk usage will not be
greater.
The file created by mkfatimage16 then can be used as a virtual drive, when defined in
.I /etc/dosemu.conf.
As long as
.B \-k
is not given, the number of heads defaults to 4 and you have 17 sectors per track
else it is adjusted accordingly.
To vary the size, you may either use the
.B \-t
/
.B \-h
options or specify the total amount of Kbytes via
.B \-k
option.

All files given behind the options will be copied onto the
hdimage. In addition a
.BR DOSEMU
suitable master boot record (MBR) is established and via option
.B \-b
you may specify a boot sector that gets inserted as first sector
of the partition. To later access the hdimage outside of
.BR DOSEMU
you should use
.BR mtools
(/etc/mtools.conf parameters
.BR partition=1 " and " offset=128 ).



.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I \-b file
Insert the first 512 bytes of
.I file
into the bootsector of the partition.
.TP
.I \-t num
Make the virtual disk have
.I num
tracks.
.TP
.I \-h num
Make the virtual disk have
.I num
heads. Using tracks and heads is one way to define the size of the disk.
.TP
.I \-k Kbytes
Make the virtual disk be
.I Kbytes
in size. Using
.I \-t|\-h
and
.I \-k
are mutual exclusive.
.TP
.I \-l label
insert
.I label
as volume label for the disk.
.TP
.I \-f outfile
The hdimage is written to
.I outfile
instead of
.I stdout
.TP
.I \-p
Pad the hdimage with zero up to the total size given by
.I \-t|\-h
or
.I \-k
(only in conjunction with
.IR \-f ).



.SH AUTHOR
Pasi Eronen (pe@iki.fi) and Peter Wainwright.

.SH BUGS
This program doesn't support name mangling and does very little checking
for non-DOS filenames.
Disk full condition isn't detected (and probably causes
erratic behaviour).
Duplicate files aren't detected.

.SH AVAILABILITY
Comes with
.B DOSEMU

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dosemu "(1), " xdosemu "(1), " mtools "(1)"



